# Remote Teams

Working with remote teams is one of the hardest things to do in Software, but is
becoming more common place. In theory it should work out fine, as you should be
able to determine what needs to be done, have 1 person do it without any need
for interaction with anyone else, and if you make the API correctly, you can
just link in to it without any issue. Sounds simple right?

In the real world this doesn't work out usually. As anyone who has been in
Software for an extended period of time knows, situations change daily, and what
you have defined up front can be altered depending on business need. That
doesn't mean that you can't work well with remote teams, that just means you
need to work harder to ensure success.

## Kanban

I'm sure you've heard it before from all manner of Kanban specialists, but this
really is the best workflow to use when working with remote teams in my
experience. Waterfall just doesn't have the capacity for making changes on the
fly like Kanban allows for, and Agile (IMO) wastes times with meetings about how
long you think something will take, when that is a largely irrelevant metric. If
you are doing Kanban, you have tickets created for work that needs to be done,
and can estimate how long a project will take based on previously collected
metrics and a little thing we in the business refer to as ... Math (Scary I
know).

## 1 Day Tickets

So you might be asking how does Kanban solve anything for Remote Teams? All you
did was say how it's "faster" than other workflows. The answer to that is the
part about the metrics. In my experience (I have software that allows for this,
so adapt to your project obviously), tickets that I think will take a day are
the best at not only getting my software out faster, but also making sure there
are less regressions and a higher quality. This is especially useful with remote
teams, where one of the most difficult things about working with someone remote
is coordination. With single day tickets, if someone takes a vacation or is out
for the day, you can easily swap in a new ticket and complete it, then come back
to the one you were working on when they get back. Compare that to multi-day
tickets where you will begin work, and either need to context switch twice, or
wait until you completely finish the one you just picked up, at which point you
might have memory loss as to the finer details of the ticket. You might also
guess that this is highly useful on non-remote teams as well. Making quick fixes
that are easily tested and promoted is invaluable in software development.

## Communication

This is the hard one of course. How do I keep in touch with someone who I can't
just walk over to their desk to talk to? Not only that, but what about someone
who isn't even in the same timezone as me? They might be gone by the time I get
online, or I might need to wait 6 hours for them to be online. The answer to
this one isn't straight forward unfortunately. This one just takes patience and
playing around with what works best for your team. Possibly it isn't a problem
to make everyone's schedules link up regardless of timezone. For instance maybe
the home office starts an hour later than usual, and the remote team an hour
earlier. It doesn't seem like a lot, but in general I find that I'm most in need
of communication a couple hours after I've gotten in to the office. This gives
me time to scan through e-mail, and work on whatever problem I was trying to
solve. By the 2-3 hour mark, either I've solved the problem and need a review,
or I'm having issues and need to talk with someone. You'd be amazed how much you
can gain by just swinging the time an hour in each direction. Obviously this
isn't always possible, but generally it's not to hard for 1 of the teams to make
a one hour change. Software engineers tend to be nocturnal from my experience,
so when I give the team an option to start their day off an hour later,
generally it's accepted.

## Experience

Another not straightforward, nor sexy answer is experience. You won't get
everything right at the start. Working remotely does make things more difficult,
no matter what people tell you. That doesn't mean you will take a 20% efficiency
hit or anything, but communication is a large part of our business. From the
team leads who need to keep in touch with management to make sure they are doing
the correct business need, to the team lead communication with the team to make
sure goals are being met correctly, and are forward looking. Good communication
comes from getting used to the team and understanding how each individual works
best. Some people need simple reminders as they are more big picture, than
crossing the t's and dotting the i's personnel. Others get too caught up in a
single objective, and need to be pulled back from time to time. You can't know
all of this the first day you start working with someone, so it's important to
remember that the best way to gain efficiency is through experience.

# Are you done yet?

Fine, fine I'll shut up. Just try to think about the above topics when starting
with or trying to refactor a remote team situation. They all probably seem
obvious, but sometimes it's good to go back to square one. Hopefully you are
either refreshed of the things you were already doing, or picked up some new
ideas.